# Hydrant-Object-Detection
DAEN-690-002 : Team Phoenix working with the Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department

During a fire break out, every second counts. Statistically, there are approximately one million fire outbreaks which result in thousands of civilian’s fire fatalities and over $15.9 billion of property damage per year in the United States. In the event of a fire, firefighters rely on convenient and easily accessible fire hydrants to extinguish fires effectively. However, locating fire hydrants manually is a time-consuming and inefficient task, and may lead to delays in emergency response times. Failure to locate a fire hydrant quickly in emergency situations can result in significant loss of life and property. To address this challenge, the Fairfax County Fire and Rescue department (FCFRD) is utilizing image data collected by the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) to maintain their hydrant database with more accurate and timely data. By ensuring the accuracy of the database, first responders will know where to find hydrants before they arrive on scene, improving response times. Thus, our project aims to automate hydrant detection from images with high confidence. To achieve this, our project examines various object detection methods and observed that pre-trained COCO models EfficientDet and Faster R-CNN have high performance, when implemented on our hydrant image dataset. After fine-tuning both models using 3000 manually annotated images, our Faster R-CNN and EfficientDet models produced average confidence scores of approximately 98% and 85%, respectively. Based on these results, the Faster R-CNN model was deemed the best for hydrant object detection. Our Faster R-CNN model achieved a 23% gain in average confidence scores compared to the EfficientDet model that FCFRD originally trained on 400 images. The improved hydrant detection performance will lead to a more reliable fire hydrant database.
